Today I'm chatting with Alex
who is director of AGI economics at
Google DeepMind and professor of
economics at University of Chicago and
Phil Trammell who is head of economics
at Epoch and research scholar at
Stanford. In general in this interview
what I want to understand is what
economics tells us about what we can
expect in a world with more and more
automation, more and more advanced AI,
what that tells us about what will
happen to wages, to labor share,
what the best way to tax and
redistribute the wealth that we
generated as a result of AGI will be
and what kinds of things will be scarce
because what is scarce kind of tells you
where the value will accrue. So I want
to start there. What are some plausible
candidates of what will be scarce?
>> Something like the relational sector
which is what I defined as
you know basically services and goods
where the fact that the human was in the
loop was actually part of the value of
that product. So because humans are
naturally scarce
if we have automation where a lot of
other things stop being scarce, we will
still have scarcity in things that
humans are kind of involved in and in
the loop for.
>> I'm curious to understand whether
humans doing services for other humans
can ever be a big part of the economy.
And here's maybe one intuition pump. So
in a world where AI can physically do
anything humans can do
you know there's this whole machine
economy where they're like building
factories and doing research and coming
up with new ideas and humans may or may
not be involved in the physical
production of those things but probably
not given that in the ultimate limit if
robotics is solved, if you don't care
about humans being involved in that
process, why would humans be involved in
that process? But then there's these
other things which you point out where
well we actually maybe in some cases do
want the ballerina or the barista or
whatever to be a human that's part of
the value of going to a cafe or a
performance. But only humans have that
preference. So there's this human
economy where like humans are doing
services for each other, and part of
their wealth is flowing to other humans,
but part of their wealth is also like
they they will want some of the
automated goods that's like machine-only
economies creating. And so part of that
wealth is flowing out. And so if you
just think of it this is like this is
not a closed loop, but a lot of things
in the machine-only economy are closed
loop because the machines don't care
about like getting
the human barista to make them a coffee.
And so within that model it isn't isn't
intrinsic that like the human-only
economy will become a smaller and
smaller share?
>> I would like to pitch kind of a
rephrasing of that question. So I think
my view is that kind of forecast that
economists like us would make are not
necessarily as individual forecast like
me and me and Phil are talking right
now, are not necessarily very useful.
The reason I think that so there was
this blog post by Andre
Fredkin, Brian DeBerry, and then Andrew
Coe that came out yesterday actually,
that looked at like kind of people's
forecasts, economists' forecasts about
the labor market. And what they found is
that there's a ton of disagreement like
in every single direction. So what they
advocate for, and I think I I'm in
agreement here, is rather than thinking
about individual forecasts like what me
and Phil are going to do, rather looking
at kind of like basically generating
prediction markets where you get
aggregate forecasts, where you get like
kind of
wisdom of the crowd effects. And kind of
the reason that I think this is because
we have been famously terrible at
forecasting. And so let's let's take
let's go all the way back to 1820. Um
this sort of debate that we've been
having actually is like 200 years old.
So David Ricardo is one of the classic
economists, not neoclassical, classical
economists. And he when industrial
revolution started happening, he was
wrote a bunch of stuff saying like look
this is going to be great for everybody,
prices are going to come down. But then
he turned around and he's like wait, I
can actually see all of these jobs that
are creating value, they're going to be
automated by these machines. This is
going to be really bad. Everybody's
going to become unemployed, and there's
going to be political unrest and things
like that. And if you look at Ricardo's
predictions, they're actually right. If
you look at all those jobs that made
money in Ricardo's time, they got
automated.
So, if I was David Ricardo and I woke up
and somebody told me all those jobs did
get automated.
And you ask me David Ricardo, like what
do you think the prime age employment
rate is in 2026? I think he would be
surprised if you told him it was the
highest it's ever been other than 2000.
We have the highest number of employed
people that could potentially be
employed since 2000. That was like the
peak and now it's like the second peak,
basically. So, what David Ricardo ended
up missing is the fact that, you know,
essentially you have these economics of
structural change where basically
everything that got automated became
cheap, people had more money to spend on
things, and then they started spending
money on services. And you know, this is
kind of like the lump of labor fallacy.
That's what they call it. David Ricardo
didn't think, "Hey, I should have, you
know, considered the fact that new jobs
would be created."
But it's kind of not obvious that like
money would go to services. Like why
wouldn't they go to more automated goods
or and something like that? And I'm not
saying that like I'm not using this
anecdote as to say like this is what's
going to happen now. We're going to have
full employment. I'm using that anecdote
as to say it's really hard to make
predictions. And what I think maybe a a
really useful tool that econ economists
have is instead start with the premise.
Like maybe we'll start it today. Look,
labor share is zero. Like labor share
has gone down. What could possibly
explain this? Let's write down an
economic model of what happened. Phil
will talk about this later today. Or you
can start write down a model to say,
"Hey, what if labor share just stays the
same?"
What can make that happen? And here's my
main here's if you don't take anything
out of this conversation for me, we
don't have any data. I've been kind of
saying we need a Manhattan project for
data. We don't have data on basically
consumer demand elasticities. We don't
know what they are. We don't know
we're not really tracking what jobs are
getting created or destroyed. Like the
O*NET database with all of the tasks and
different jobs that's been rarely
updated at super low quality. And so
what I think is really useful is to
think about like what are the potential
scenarios and we'll be talking about a
lot of these scenarios, mapping them out
and to say what type what dimension of
scarcity will generate that scenario. So
if there's full employment, we could
talk about the relational sector or
something like that. If there's a you
know very labor share collapses, we can
talk about other sorts of scenarios. And
then that will tell us what data we
should be collecting.
>> It's probably worth it defining labor
share and capital share real quick. So
the whole economy like the the total sum
of goods and services sold
is either paid out to people in wages
>> Yeah.
>> or it's paid out to
capital which is to say that there's
like rents on buildings and then there's
shareholders of companies that we get
paid out and for many hundreds of years
in the economy
60 something percent of the economy for
all the things that are sold in a given
year basically gets paid out to humans
in wages and the other 30 40% gets paid
out to people who own machines and land
and claims on companies and whatever.
And the question is well right now if
60% is going to wages, does that shrink
as automation
or as EIs get smarter and smarter and
better and better?
>> And it's like it really this is a call
door fact. Like right? So it's
incredibly we should stress this. It's
incredibly surprising.
>> Right.
>> That it's over 60% after the Industrial
Revolution after all of the automation
we've ever seen. The fact that it's
almost like some people are worried it's
an accounting error or something like
that that it's kept being been so
constant and
the fact that it's like been over 60%
and you know there's there's even a
controversy right now.
So some might say like you know labor
share has been falling in the last 20,
30 years, but you know, depending on how
you
There's been a lot of accounting changes
in the last 30, 40 years. So, for
example, Andy Atkins has has this paper
showing that actually actually if you
keep the accounting constant over the
years, labor share hasn't even fallen
ever.
>> But it is not it's not that surprising,
right? I mean, if
Phil you made this point that if labor
and capital are complements, you need
both to do anything. Well, kind of makes
sense that you kind of need to pay both
of them to get something done.
>> have had stuff can be completely
automated.
>> Although you had the post where you were
pointing out that actually Sorry, you
should
>> Oh, yeah, well, I was going to say
there's a sense in which nothing's yet
been completely automated. If you look
at the network adjusted factor shares of
a good, which is to say you look down
the supply chain and say not just like
the final step, but how much of that is
done by capital and labor, but what went
into the machines that can automate that
final step.
You'll find that labor's adding a lot of
value down the supply chain. So, like,
you know, computer and electronic
products in the US have a very stable
capital share, network adjusted capital
share of around 50%. It's not 100%.
Um, I do think there's this qualitative
shift that we I think we agree is
coming, which is that there will be at
least some goods whose network adjusted
capital share goes to one. Right?
Because the whole supply chain can be
automated and there's no part in it that
we care intrinsically about having a
human do.
Um, so that'll be a, you know, that'll
be a qualitative shift. Interestingly,
the implications of that shift for the
overall
capital share are ambiguous, because
if we let's say that we've got the two
sectors, the human intrinsic sector with
the ballerinas, and everything else,
right?
Right now,
everything else has been scarce because
of the lack of labor in it, right? But
if we fully automate the supply chains
for everything else, right? And we
satiate in everything else really fast,
then
the quantity of everything that's not a
ballerina, say,
goes to infinity, but
or the marginal utility in that stuff
goes to zero faster than the quantity is
rising.
>> Yeah. I also kind of want to move if you
don't mind, move away from the ballerina
example, cuz I think like the kind of
point that I was trying to make in my
post
again, and the point of the post was
like to work backwards from a particular
scenario, was that kind of the ballerina
and the kind of performer, that's the
wrong reference class.
Right now, we have a lot of jobs where
you have different tasks. So, this is
the task-based model jobs, where you
have like a lot of different tasks. So,
like a doctor, what is their job?
They're filling out insurance documents.
They're you know, going and like calling
different pharmaceutical companies. And
one of their tasks is to actually see
the patient and talk to them, but that's
like actually not the main part part of
the job.
So, you could have you could have a job
and a service or a good
be a product of different types of
tasks, and you can automate a ton of
those tasks. And if the consumer's
willing to pay more for a product or
service where every single task is
automated, versus every single thing
except for that one part where the
doctor's actually delivering the
diagnosis, providing support and things
like that, we would call that job a
relate part of the relational sector,
right? Because a human is people are
willing to pay more for the human to
stay in the loop in the job. Right?
Right? So, I think we don't have data
to say like here are relational jobs,
here are not, because you literally need
to collect data of the following sort.
Do a conjoint analysis of like here's my
willingness to pay for this service,
this good, here's the counterfactual
where everything is presumed to spy
machine, here's the counterfactual where
this one task is not
Right. What is your willingness to pay?
What is your elasticity for that for the
human to not be in the loop? And like
literally, if I don't have that data,
what prediction am I going to make in
this in this story, right?
>> Right. But I I guess isn't there another
point which is that there's a lot of
fully automated goods that don't even
exist yet? And you can't collect any
data right now about, say, how much
people will want to keep buying more and
more of some drug that makes you
healthier that's fully produced by the
AIs.
>> and that that's kind of Phil's point
that
and you you can you can make it is that
look,
you know, you could have an increase in
variety in capital where you don't get
the say share. Right? So, you're
increasing variety, so you're not
hitting that really
diminishing marginal utility point where
you're, you know, you're basically most
of your income is going to to to the to
the human sector.
If that increasing in variety is fast
enough and there is no such increasing
variety in the human sector, then you
can get all of the relational that you
want, but it doesn't matter for labor
share. It goes to zero.
>> Uh Phil, I like your analogy to some
Mongolian economist sitting around in
1400 thinking about what will be scarce
and the limits of that kind of analysis.
Do do
I think you should talk to that.
>> Sure, yeah. So, if you just looked at um
the goods available to, you know, a
Mongolian of the distant past, no expert
on this society, but I know they didn't
have nearly the variety that we have
now. And
um they looked at the jobs that were
sort of intrinsically human like being
being a singer, say.
Um and then they looked at the
the things that were not intrinsically
human like, um you know,
the transportation services provided by
their horses or the the different kinds
of food they had.
If they just kind of held the varieties
fixed on in both categories and asked,
um what will happen once we have a lot
more automation, um they might have
said, well, we'll just satiate in,
you know, uh horse-like transportation
and in yogurt and in airts. Those shares
will all go to zero and we'll be left
spending all of our money on on singers.
>> Mhm.
>> Um but of course, that's not what's
happened, because as we've accumulated
more wealth and you know, more advanced
machines and and so on,
we've expanded the range of things other
than singers to spend our money on, and
the share spent on singers has stayed
sort of negligible.
Um
so likewise, that's sort of my central
prediction about how future unfolds,
though I it could go either way.
>> I I was going to make a point and I
realize it's a fallacy, but the reason
it's a fallacy is interesting. So I was
going to say
um
I mean, it's just hard to imagine a
world where there's trillions upon
trillions of robots, but there's only
some billion odd humans,
and then like the cumulative amount
we're spending on robots and like
building more robots and whatever is
less than what we're spending to like
pay, you know, Magnus Carlsen and
>> Or or financial advisors or doctors or
tutors.
>> or whatever.
>> But then I I realized that's a fallacy.
Um
the number of transistors in the world
has like literally
uh certainly trillion X, maybe
quadrillion X or something. And your
colleague Chad Jones has a very
interesting result about how the
share of the economy that is going
towards paying for computing basically,
like paying for the transistors,
um has been decreasing. The point that
you made is that one way to think about
Moore's law
you know, what sets price? Well, the
price is a supply and demand, and so not
only are we producing more transistors
more cheaply, but also we're like the
value of the marginal transistor is
decreasing, right? So more the as you
were saying, another way of saying
Moore's law is what you should say.
>> I like the yeah, the the pessimistic
framing of Moore's law is every 18
months, the value of computation halves,
yeah, right? Like we're just running out
of uses for computation so fast that
it's sustaining Moore's law.
>> And and this is in fact like literally
relevant to a conversation about AI
where
>> Yeah.
>> Um
maybe for the first time this is no
longer true.
>> Right.
>> So, the famous fact here is that an H100
costs more to rent now than it did 3
years ago, even though we have much
superior technology and we have much
more compute in the world um because
as models get smarter, the opportunity
cost of compute gets higher.
>> Phil's point about increasing variety.
>> Yeah.
>> Right.
>> Right? What we have done is increased
increased the types of things that
people demand from capital.
>> Yeah.
>> Now all of a sudden you have a new
variety that you could be using capital
for and all of a sudden you you you jump
back up.
>> Yeah, you could imagine we just never
satiate demand for compute and if as
long as that stays the case,
um then the share of the economy that is
going towards compute would keep
increasing.
>> And that that's the big question, right?
It's like that is the ultimate question
that we need to be kind of looking at is
like what what number of new uses are we
figure finding for that compute where
you have the demand for these uses? So,
what I kind of want to emphasize is that
a lot of models
in economics, especially in the space
that we're talking about, take demand as
almost kind of exogenous and they don't
unpack like what is the like the
psychology of what people actually want.
And so, what
got me kind of also thinking about this
the idea of the relational sector is
work that I was doing on the fact that
there does seem to be this value this
intrinsic value
that is it's not just because it's
scarce, it's because there's some
intrinsic preference that people have
for like empathy and connection and you
know, getting getting uh
interacting with another person. So,
like one of the experiments uh that we
ran was like there there's an art print,
right? And we actually have an incentive
compatible way of like basically saying
like how much are are willing to pay for
this art print. People actually paying
real money for it. And then we say like
look, there's only one one of those art
prints
and it's either made and these are
between subject conditions by by AI or
by a person. So with one, you get the
effect that the person produced art
print is valued much much higher than
the than the AI version. And then what
we do is to say there's in a set of
other conditions, there's 500 of these
being produced. So for the human made
one, the price goes down a lot because
it's no longer seen as like you're not
like making a connection with this one
artist versus with AI, there's no
difference. AI is already viewed as like
a commodity. Right. And you know, we
need to do a lot more research on this,
but it seems like that's kind of like
the the key difference between
you know, something like let's say a
horse, right? There's no a horse was an
input into a into an output where you
can replace the horse with something
else. You only care about the output.
The only way this relational story works
and this is what we need more more data
on is if it's not a human is not a horse
in the sense that it is providing value
from the output where if you replace the
human, the the value of the output
decreases. And if that's not strong
enough and if it doesn't hold for enough
sectors, if it doesn't hold for enough
jobs,
um then this kind of story doesn't work
anymore.
>> There aren't that many situations that
have thought as hard as Jane Street
about how to turn smart people into some
of the most competent researchers and
engineers in the world. This relies in
part on an apprenticeship model where
new hires are paired with senior
mentors. But Jane Street also runs a
bunch of classroom style lectures and
hands-on boot camps. These courses cover
a range of topics and they go pretty
deep. There's one lecture that focuses
on reverse engineering systems with
tools like S Trace and GDB and another
that teaches you how to profile code
down to the cash hierarchy level.
Importantly, Jane Street designs these
courses not just to teach the relevant
object level skills, but also to impart
the relevant tacit knowledge. For
example, their week-long neural net boot
camp starts with general theory, but
then quickly progresses to how to apply
neural networks to trading. And here
they cover the specific obstacles that
Jane Street traders tend to encounter
and the workarounds they've come up with
to [music] get around them. Jane Street
takes this sort of learning incredibly
seriously. Every office has dedicated
classroom space and courses are
prioritized as a part of regular work.
If you'd like to work at a place like
this, Jane Street is hiring. You can
check out their open roles at
janestreet.com/dorcas.
>> There's one possibility which
Molly
has written something about this messy
middle scenario and there's that
possibility
made me think about whether it might be
better to have, at least as far as
wealth distribution
and redistribution goes, it might be
better to have much faster AI takeoff.
And I want to ask you whether the
following
possibility
is at all likely or there's any set of
assumptions that this can make it so,
which is that
AI makes it possible to automate jobs
such that like many people are losing
their jobs, but it doesn't create enough
wealth while the process of automation
is happening to
pay off basically the people who are
getting laid off so there's like a
Pareto improvement. Everybody's getting
better as a result of AI automation. And
of course, there's a trivial sense in
which that must be true because whatever
money you're saving, whatever money the
company is saving by not paying the
humans instead of just paying the AIs,
those resources still exist in the
economy and they can just be paid off to
people, but there's going to be some
allocated inefficiency like the
government doesn't know exactly who got
laid off because of AI. There's some
political problem of like if the meta
worker gets laid off first and they're
making 200k a year.
Is there a politically sustainable
situation where you give them a 200k
check a year when there's many people
who are working who are making much
less?
Um
so
do you at all find this scenario
plausible where AI is actually
automating a bunch of things, but there
isn't enough wealth creation as as is
automation?
>> Uh,
>> think it's
>> Is that plausible?
>> Possible, to me it does seem like a
pretty narrow window. My guess is that
if we have the technology to automate
so many jobs that it becomes like a new
kind of political problem then probably
all of us be growing really fast. Well,
unless in all of those professions that
it's automating,
>> [snorts]
>> it's just a hair more productive. So
like the cost of all the capital to
uh
to to replace all the software engineers
is just, you know, a hair less than the
cost of what we'd pay the software
engineer.
>> And why why is it implausible that it's
just like a company can save money by
laying off a bunch of software
engineers, but and in the long run
there's a Jevons paradox thing and you
know, we can't anticipate in advance
what we'd do with more software and
surely there's going to be more uses,
but in the short run the fact is just
that a lot of people are laid off and
they still need to figure out how they
can use a million X more JavaScript
tokens.
>> the thing that like is in either like,
you know, Phil Phil and I have been like
writing about these things and we have
mathematical models in the back of these
things. We don't have any political
economy in any of our models.
>> Mhm.
>> Andy Hall wrote a really nice blog post
about the politics of AGI and he made a
really interesting observation. If
there's a 2% increase in unemployment,
the political winds completely change.
Like unemployment it has a huge effect
on what happens politically. So, you
know, to to Molly's excellent essay by
the way.
Um I think in some ways like one of the
worst scenarios is a drip scenario
because of the political economy piece.
Right? Because like you know, people
essentially what you
what you might see is like people not
really being unemployed in mass, but
kind of like moving into sectors that
pay them less money, kind of basically
getting what happened with phone
operators in in in the mid-century of
the of the
between 1920 and 1940 phone operators
were completely automated, right? But it
took 20 years even though the technology
existed and therefore there was this
drip. It wasn't like this giant sector
just disappeared.
>> Yeah.
>> And what ended up happening you there's
a really nice uh QJE paper on this,
basically showing that a lot they were
got reabsorbed into the economy.
But at lower salaries, and they were
mostly underemployed.
And I think that's the scenario that
Molly was was was writing about this
like kind of messy middle where like
things aren't a disaster because we saw
with COVID like the fiscal fiscal
response can move quickly if there's an
emergency. And an emergency is a quick
uptick in a unemployment, which could
even look like 2 or 3% that becomes that
becomes a national emergency if it
becomes fast.
>> Um the concern is
that suppose what whatever you're saving
on those white-collar workers
if that's not growing the economy, but
it's just creating some you know, saved
resources that can be allocated
elsewhere. Is that enough to do
um a broad-based redistribution scheme?
Because then you you have like the money
you saved up a couple of people.
>> Yeah.
>> And unless you can figure out exactly
how to get it to them specifically,
where you have the problem of can can I
do like can I do a UBI off the money I
saved by doing
>> saying like look the pie did not grow
that much. You're just basically you're
just basically
displacing a bunch of people, but that
actually didn't grow the the
technological frontier of what the
economy can produce.
>> And so then there's a question of like
well maybe every time I don't know if
this is a case maybe every time this has
happened in history the the
technological frontier has expanded a
bunch and so
>> I think that's the case. I think simply
in in in in history the technological
frontier has expanded. Yeah. So it's
it's it's it's kind of and I I think
Philip made same point. Like it's hard
to imagine that sort of scenario um
where you are getting like
intelligence that's
kind of just enough to replace the
software engineer, but still costs a lot
of money. Like it's just a hair less
less less expensive than the software
engineer. So you're not getting this
abundance effect.
>> Right.
>> And so you're what where is the
redistribution going to happen because
the pie didn't grow.
>> Yeah, yeah. Okay, so
this is very helpful. So there's a co-
Many different things have to be true
for this scenario to come to pass, each
of which seem unlikely. One, it has to
be the case that it is possible to
automate entire white-collar jobs, but
only in a piecemeal way. That is to say
that you can only automate the software
engineers, but that same program can't
also automate an accountant and an
analyst and whatever. Where I think, um,
at least my model of intelligence is
such that both of like the breadth of
capacity it requires to do something
like software engineering, um, and what
intelligence is is such that, you know,
if you can really just like lay off all
the software engineers, you've got
enough in the bucket there that you
could like
um, automate all kinds of white-collar
work. So, yeah, you're saving
There's huge amounts of potential
savings that have happened as a result
of these layoffs. And also, that AI is
going to be cheaper than human labor.
Um, and if both of those things are
true, this messy middle scenario, where
we literally don't have the wealth to,
uh, go around seems unlikely. And then
the question is like, what is the best
way to tax it and redistribute it?
>> Yeah, I have some thoughts. I think I
think I think it's just really important
to outline the costs and benefits. Like
um, it's also important to know that
they're So, first, there's differential
complexity in like implementing these
things.
Uh, two, they differ in the timeline of
like being actually helpful. So, like
something like universal basic capital,
that's not like that's not going to
generate returns for something that
happens in 6 months. So, you probably
are going to end up with a layer
of things. So, like for example, like a
negative income tax. Like you implement
it, and it it the day it turns into law,
that is already you already have this
sort of insurance that like, you know,
there's a floor for which, you know,
everybody everybody gets a certain
amount of money, and then, you know, if
you earn more money, you get taxed more
and things like that. Um,
and
but, you know, there's
positives and negatives to negative
income tax. With UBI, the for example,
the I I I I worry a lot about like the
political economy implications. Like,
for example, like if people are just
kind of dependent on a check,
it really matters who's in power. Like,
right now we're endowed with labor that
can turn into uh that can turn into
income.
When that is no longer the case and we
are now at the mercy of the
of the elected official for like basic
needs, right? So, that to me feels like
a power sharing arrangement that's
really dangerous.
>> But, wouldn't that be true of any sort
of government redistribution program?
>> So, something like universal basic
capital where you have like an ownership
share and you have property rights for
capital,
then you just you're just you're just
you're just a normal person.
>> And but this goes back to the question
of indexing because if indexing is hard,
then universal basic capital is hard.
>> the that that's the problem with
universal basic capital is targeting,
right? What do you target to put into
people's portfolios?
>> Like, what if Enthought goes to zero,
but some brand new robotics company
takes all the surplus?
>> Exactly, exactly. So, that's the risk of
universal basic capital with a
>> negative income tax, you have the same
sort of issues that with UBI. Where
where like, you know, somebody comes
into power and says like this is we're
not going to do that anymore and people
can't work and then, you know, you you
have the issue of the the floor being
raised.
>> Right. One concern with the wealth tax
is that, you know, you there's no
political politically sustainable
equilibrium at like 0.5% wealth tax.
And, you know,
I mean, this happened with the income
tax of course, right? It starts low,
it's like for a war or something and
then it has slowly and slowly escalates
until the marginal tax rate in the US is
probably on the order of income tax rate
is like 40% or something.
Um, and in certain states upwards of
50%. Um,
with a capital tax, is there a reason to
worry would it would that distort
investment because people would just be
like, why would I invest in Enthought or
Intel? The government's just going to
take larger and larger shares of it and
dilute my share.
>> W- well, well, hold on. So, um,
I think it's worth separating like
how the revenue is raised, like what's
taxed and then how it's distributed. It
could be that the government hands out
shares of Anthropic to everyone by by
broad-based tax and then buying
Anthropic.
>> Yeah, okay.
>> Which would probably be the right thing
to do. I mean, hopefully some like
populist proposal doesn't interfere with
that and and like expropriate some like
particular company that everyone happens
to know about. Um
>> But how So you're you're suggesting
there could be a tax that is some sort
of optimal tax it's we're taxing
externalities or we're taxing land or
we're
I guess we'd probably need to tax
something other than just those two
things. But that tax
>> yeah. Or consumption.
>> Okay. So a consumption tax
like a European value-added tax type
thing that allows the government to go
buy a bunch of stocks
and then they just distribute those
stocks
to everybody.
>> That's David Autor's
>> Yeah, yeah. I mean, that's not going to
be that different from just like
redistributing the stocks, but it'll be
a little different.
>> Yeah. That's what social security That
was the proposal for social security, by
the way. That was privatizing social
security, right? So it's like you have
you turn like this sort of weird like
not weird, but it's been working it's
worked so far, but you know, there's
questions for how long it's going to
keep working. Like basically,
privatizing social security was giving
everybody a basket of stocks.
>> Right.
Okay, I'm I'm curious to understand
people talk about whether there's a
white-collar apocalypse already. Is
there any evidence
uh that suggests that there is mass
automation or unemployment as a result
of AI already?
>> Um I think there's a a lot of people are
looking at it. So this is an area where
there's like a lot of eyes and a lot of
data being produced. Uh so the budget
lab over Yale is doing really good
analysis on this. They just recently
released a report. And I think like you
really have to squint to see anything
happening. Like basically, if you want
to take kind of like uh
an an approach across the entire economy
and looking at even looking at like
software engineering, like the most
exposed sort of sectors, there's just
like not really anything going on. There
might be a little bit of a signal about
like junior developers getting jobs less
than before, and that but that's like a
less than before rather than a level
shift. As in, there's actually an
increased demand for senior manager for
senior software engineers if anything.
Um, and so if you look at trend, it's
kind of like for junior managers, it's a
bit below trend.
>> So as in, you're saying the growth is
slower than before.
>> Yes. But there is still growth even on
entry-level software engineers.
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> And what do you think is going on with
the anecdotal evidence of
graduating college students saying that
they're finding it harder to find
CS jobs or something?
>> I think that's anecdotal evidence.
>> You think it
it's always been hard to get jobs for
some people, and now it's getting turned
into an AI narrative. Same with the
layoffs, where it's probably just normal
layoff, and they turned it into an AI
layoff.
>> Yeah, I mean, you you have to be careful
with all of this. I think like there are
these like, you know, there are these
like coordinate public coordination
devices for like, let's say we get into
a narrative where like if you're a firm
and you're not laying people off,
then you're seen as like not adapting AI
enough. So like then you'll get you're
going to just get a cascade effect of
firms like just needing to keep up with
the Joneses in terms of like starting to
lay people off. And that's kind of like
that that's super worrying, where like
actually the firm might be actually
worse off
>> Right.
>> after the layoffs than before the
layoffs, but it's just doing the layoffs
to have the perception that look look
we're not behind the times. We're we're
we're, you know, using AI. Like you have
the you probably heard these anecdotal
stories of like these token counters
that like you have to maximize tokens
and things like that. So
again, like right now we have we don't
really have a any evidence of a
white-collar bloodbath.
>> And is that surprising at all? I I feel
given the fact all these things AI can
do is just like this is a story as old
as time. If you automate some
complimentary task, the overall bucket
of things that the
the human labor which complements the
automation
>> Yeah. will will increase in value.
>> So this is this is one of the statistics
that's really important for that
argument is elasticity of demand. So
like the you take the old ring model of
jobs. So like again jobs is a series of
tasks. Let's say the AI automates like
nine out of 10
nine out of 10 tasks. One task is not
automated. If that person can now kind
of focus in on that task and the job
will become more productive. If that
translates into a price effect where the
product is actually cheaper, if the
demand responds enough where now there's
it's being bought more, it's being used
more, the service is being used more.
That could actually lead to more higher.
>> Right.
>> And a lot of people on the internet have
been like kind of making that argument
kind of very generally saying like look
we're seeing if anything in the data
we're seeing an uptick in software
engineering.
>> Right. Yeah. Yeah.
>> Which suggests that at least for now
given the way the jobs work, it might be
elastic.
>> But I think this elasticity of demand
argument
is incredibly important both for for a
lot of arguments that people make um
or just a lot of labels that people use
without understanding what the
underlying causation is. So people often
talk about Jevons paradox.
>> Yeah.
>> Um this is this idea that as something
gets cheaper you will want so much more
of it that the total amount you spend on
the thing increases. And so famously
this happened to coal in Britain 200 odd
years ago. But really this only happens
if
there's the demand for something is
highly elastic. There's many things for
which there is not super elastic demand.
If oil for example gets super cheap,
it's not like magically right? Yeah,
exactly.
Magically there's going to be so many
more cars that
now we're going to be using way more oil
than before.
>> At least not in the short run.
>> Exactly. So the long run elasticity is
higher than short run elasticity. But
even in the long run so agriculture
famous is the example where
we can produce way more food if we
dedicated the same portion of the
economy that we dedicated to
agriculture. We're already producing
more food regardless, but we could
produce even more food if the same
portion of the economy that was
producing food 100 years ago was
currently producing food.
Um but, you know, you eat enough and
then you're done. And so, the claim with
software is that it is a It is not some
inherent property of markets that as it
gets cheaper, you'll just keep wanting
more of it.
>> Absolutely not.
>> It is The thing about software is this
is a particular kind of good where as it
gets cheaper, we'll want more and more
of it.
It is also highly relevant in your essay
about this. A lot of this A lot of this
podcast is me summarizing your essays
back to you.
Uh that there's this very viral
uh scenario planning about the future by
Citrini where they're predicting as a
result of automation, as a result of
very powerful AI, there will be a
recession because white-collar workers
will get automated. Uh their salaries,
which were, you know, paying for a bunch
of things,
will no longer be available and so,
there will be a slump.
Do you want to recapitulate why this
might be implausible?
>> Well, I mean, so part of it is
plausible, part of it's not not
plausible. So, like the the part that's
kind of like within the This is
something that we started the
conversation with is the idea that there
could be unemployment, a lot of
unemployment as if if the speed of
automation is quick and things like
that. People could get laid off and they
may not find work very
uh
very quickly. So, that part of the
Citrini essay about the unemployment,
you know, we we can quibble about that,
but that's that's not the issue. The
issue is that they talked about negative
economic growth.
>> Right.
>> And so, what I did in the in the piece
that actually Phil and I had a back and
forth on was to say like let's start
with the with the proposition that
there's negative economic growth. What
conditions do you need on the economy to
get negative economic growth? And it
turns out the conditions are
pretty improbable. So, one thing that
you need is like for
the the holders of capital, like rich
people basically, like basically what
you have in this in those sorts of
scenarios, like you have a reallocation
of wealth and income from like lower
income people who are working or using
their labor towards capital owners. So,
what you need is that basically demand
to be bounded, like a hard bound, not
even like a soft sort of like
diminishing sensitivity. You need for
them to eventually say, I've had enough.
I don't want to spend any more money,
and for that money to not enter as
investment.
>> Right.
>> Right, which is like and then you can
get negative growth, which is like
>> And the crucial thing is even if we
don't want more
The the world in this there's a
singularity and we don't want to invest
more money is crazy, right? Where we're
not like, let's build more data centers,
let's build more fabs. Even though we
have AGI, we're not like
investing in more data centers to run
the AGI, and that's like driving more
economic growth.
>> Yeah, and so I I sent the essay to Phil,
and Phil actually wrote back being like,
this is pretty dumb. Like my essay,
saying like, you're you're trying to say
that there's going to be negative
economic growth, but they're these are
very implausible conditions. And I was
like, actually, that's the point of the
essay, that these are
>> [laughter]
>> very implausible economic conditions.
So, that's where I think like scenario
planning really shines is you have the
Centra essay, which I think is like I I
think it was great that it's written
because it kind of started a
conversation, but it's just like
you need it it's so intuitive this idea
that like, look, if there's demand
collapse, we can get the economy to
shrink, but it's actually
you could get that with a depression,
right? Where in a in the depression, the
technological frontier didn't expand.
>> Right.
>> Here, the technological frontier is
expanding. You actually have abundance,
and for abundance to generate negative
economic growth, that's really hard to
get.
>> Right, exactly.
Google recently announced Gemini Omni,
and its video editing capabilities are
incredible. You can upload a video and
then tell Omni to do things like change
the background, or adjust the lighting,
or add or remove elements,
all while keeping everything else
consistent. But, Omni isn't just a video
editor. I got a chance to sit down with
the research and product team behind
Omni, and I learned that it's a preview
of how future frontier models will be
trained. It can take in any kind of
input, whether that's text or audio or
video.
>> [music]
>> And while it doesn't currently do so,
architecturally, it's capable of just as
seamlessly outputting images or text.
So, it's really a bet on the multimodal
data transfer hypothesis. The model
becomes better at predicting one data
type by seeing the others. For example,
Omni is really good at accurately
rendering text on video, even though
Google didn't specifically target that
capability in this model. And Omni is
the next step towards more accurate
world models. Because in order to
predict the next frame of a video, you
have to have a deep understanding of
physics and spatial dynamics. As Omni
progresses, it'll be interesting to see
whether it can close the sim to real
gap. Because it's much harder to collect
data in the real world than it is in
simulation, robotics progress has lagged
other applications of AI. But if you
have really good video models that can
simulate reality, maybe that stops being
the case. In the meantime, if you want
to try Omni, you can check it out in the
Gemini app at gemini.google or use it in
Google's AI creative studio flow at
flow.google.
We're talking a second about why there
isn't more automation as a result of
LLMs. And one plausible mechanism could
be that, as you're saying with the
O-ring,
uh so O-ring theory refers to this fact
that the Challenger shuttle blew up
because there's there's one component
that malfunctioned and it destroyed the
whole thing. And maybe that's a more
general model of how goods are produced
in the economy that you got to make sure
everything is reliable and works well,
and you can't automate entire job to an
AI right now,
um even though it might be able to
perform it at some probability. You need
extreme reliability in order for it to
not destroy the finished good.
Um
I think this is Yeah, this So, this
might explain why there's less
automation now than there otherwise
could be. But I think it works in the
other direction once AIs get advanced
enough that integrating humans into the
production flow of future goods, even
beyond the
even beyond the arguments about how
humans will be more expensive or dumber
or whatever. Even beyond that, just
there will be whole production flows
that are
organized for AI labor.
Where they're talking in neuralese,
they're thinking many thousands of times
faster. So even if there's some
comparative advantage where it makes
sense to hire a human, there will be
like transaction cost and worries of a
reliability that will actually make it
hard to integrate humans into future
production flows.
>> Yeah, that that seems right to me.
In particular, I just want to
distinguish between the
the the point that if you automate like
9/10 of a job, then people might kind of
shift over to the last 10th, but like
there might be 10 times more work
demanded of them from
the model of owing automation from like
Gans and Goldfarb recently, which was
that if you can only automate 9/10 of
the job, but you can do it to a lower
standard of quality than the human could
do it, you might not want to automate
even those 9/10.
And that's the thing that could totally
port over to
um
uh
like the symmetrically, it could be a
reason why we don't use a human for one
part of the job anymore because a human
just can't perform it to the level of
quality that the AI can perform the
other parts of the job or the level of
speed or whatever. And they end up
pulling down the uh quality or speed of
the finished product.
>> By the way, the model you're talking
about seems extremely plausible to me of
why more lawyers or accountants or
whatever are not automated. Like there
are cases in or even software engineers
where there's a pretty good probability
that the thing worked as you expect, but
the the thing you're paying a lawyer for
is like, "No, really, my company's not
going to go under because um
>> You're also paying for a lot of like
regulation rights stuff, right? So like
with lawyers particularly, you need
some entity to back up the product. You
need kind of like an ownership of the
product. You need somebody to be able to
fire or or hire, like licensing issues.
There's a lot of like sort of like
regulatory layers that are like also
going to be
keeping
even if there's no relational element
human in the loop that have nothing to
do with like the ability of the human to
actually perform the service.
>> Yeah. Yeah, I mean, you know, all of
these frictions on um
the
political type decisions that we are
accustomed to only trusting human you
know, only having humans for like
legislation and being a judge, being a
jury or all the licensing thing that
keeps certain professions human
that all strikes me as transitional,
right? I mean
uh
what we expect to come from a human and
like how we organize our politics,
that's changed so many times throughout
history, right? From little
hunter-gatherer bands to empires and
whatnot. And
once
an AI-run political system is much more
efficient than the alternatives, then
those will probably tend to outcompete
the others and you know
>> So speaking of which
we've been talking about
what preferences humans currently have
and what impact that has on
what kinds of goods will be scarce in
the future.
But of course
we'll have different kinds of entities
in the future. Uh AIs, right? There was
a time when there were no humans on
Earth, but evolution selected for agents
that have specific drives and
preferences because those tend to
survive the most and those preferences
now basically determine how a hundred
trillion dollar world economy
uh what it produces. And so why not
expect the same thing of AIs in the
future. This is not This is not even a
world with um
catastrophic misalignment, that is to
say they just kill everybody, but there
will there will be evolution of even
even if not individual AIs and firms
which have AIs as part of them. And what
will that evolution favor? What will
favor probably
firms or agents that grow, right?
There's just there's like a selection
argument that uh things which grow will
be more prevalent. And maybe just based
on that you can make some predictions
about what their preferences will be.
But it is the kind of entity which
prefers to have human intrinsic goods
going to be the kind of entity that
accumulates resources the most? Probably
not, right? Probably like saves more. It
like has unsatisfiable demand for things
like
whatever the relevant resource happens
to be. Computers is an obvious one.
Um and can we use that to make some
prediction about what
the non-human preferences that will be
guiding the future?
>> Yeah, so I think
>> If there's like an AI that's like has
its own welfare and it's it's fully
autonomous and it's like making its own
decisions and it that they're that are
welfare relevant. To be honest, I I I
have absolutely
no prior that they it would like at all
prefer other to to like deal with
humans. There's like no reason. But
let's But but let let me take like a
the other side of that argument. Will
humans preferences to be interacting
with one another and to trust and
empathize and all of these sorts of like
things with other humans versus a
simulated AI? I think it's a really
important question whether those will
change. Right. So, I've heard a lot of
arguments saying like look, you know,
right now we're just not used to the
technology. And at some point like what
you're thinking of relational or
something like that, people are just
going to see like an AI therapist as a
superior product. And they're not going
to need the sort of like empathy or
whatever that the human is
providing. I think this is actually a
really complicated question.
Um here's one argument for why it's not
going to go away and that that has to do
with evolution. So, let's say there's
two types of people. One person doesn't
really have this preference. They can
just interact with other AI, whatever
can simulate it better. The other one
has almost like a like a moral emotion
like from the using Jonathan Haidt's
framework. Moral emotion against
interact like offloading those sorts of
social interactions to an AI. Which of
those two people are going to reproduce,
find a mate, all of these sorts of
things?
I think the answer is kind of clear,
right? It's the second one that has the
preference for other people.
>> on how the reproduction is happening.
>> Fair. But if if we're if we're in, you
know, the world where like
um
reproduction is still happening the way
that it's happening, I think and this is
a big question. I'm not even like I'm
not making a prediction. Again, I'm just
saying like if we're thinking you know
that you had David Reich on on the show,
like
his point on the last podcast was that,
you know, we're buzzing with natural
selection.
>> Right.
>> So even if like you get some sort of
indifference now, you might get
selection to point into like an even
stronger preference for other humans.
>> Here's one way to think about it.
How is the wealth of the
richest people in the world
instantiated? Of course they can um
as you were we had a call earlier and
making the point that their consumption
is more geared towards relational goods.
Like Mark Zuckerberg is hiring MMA
instructors and dancers for his wife's
birthday and so forth. But most of his
wealth is just
stock in Meta and he as a controlling
shareholder could say, "Hey Meta, just
give me all this income or turn all this
wealth into dividend income." Um and I
would just spend that on consumption.
But instead, he rather would have his
wealth compound um
and Meta to build more data centers
basically. So you don't even have to
change humans for this to be the case.
It is just the case that the humans
which are wealthiest and are growing
wealthier because their wealth is
compounding just have this like almost a
Nick Landian preference for like
accelerating capital. Um
and that that does seem to suggest that
yeah the is is that an important
determinant of what kinds of things are
produced in the future?
>> Yeah, could I just say like there's two
ways you could get the two kinds of
people, one of whom prefers the human
therapist and one of whom is fine
interacting with the AI.
If they both satiate equally quickly in
capital, right?
But the one who likes the human
therapist just also likes having some
human intrinsic uh services.
Um then
the marginal value like how the marginal
value of capital in the future
for compares to the marginal value of
capital today for each of them if they
start out equally rich should be
basically the same.
I mean there could be interactions and
whatnot but base basically that should
be the same.
If what's driving the difference is that
one person just doesn't satiate in
capital because they're they're
engaged by the prospect of you know
exploring the universe and turning their
head into a galaxy brain or whatever and
the other one satiates.
>> Yeah.
>> Then the person who doesn't satiate in
capital is going to have if they're
being rational they're going to have a
higher savings rate.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay so in the long run they're going to
have most of the wealth.
And [snorts]
the overall capital share will basically
be the capital share of that person
spending which is going to be one.
>> And it's important that this is we're
not talking about a hypothetical future.
>> Yeah yeah.
>> Like Elon Musk is talking about mass
drivers on the moon.
>> Right.
>> like by far the wealthiest person in the
world. I mean obviously currently his
his investments are going towards humans
as well as machines but he I don't think
he cares particularly that his like
future researchers and engineers are
humans versus AI.
>> And he manages to reproduce fast as
well. So
>> [laughter]
>> Yes.
>> So anyway so I just think it's worth
drawing that distinction. Yeah there are
currently some rich people that don't
seem to um
satiate quickly in capital and and so
maybe in the long run they'll save the
most.
>> And right yeah.
>> Um
that does seem sort of right to me.
Um
and I would just also say even if they
do reproduce more slowly like
biologically
that might just not matter that much in
the long run right if if uh
they can live forever and
>> The the living forever is key.
>> Yeah.
>> Right so I think I think again like we
and we're we're we're scenario building
here right so I think um
if you could live forever like a lot of
stuff changes for my story as well. I
think I think it's um
uh
to your point about you know, rich
people just consuming not consuming a
lot and investing. I think this will all
depend on the returns to capital.
Right? So, like right now the returns to
data centers are super hot.
Right? But, if we get into a situation
where people are satiated with capital,
um then the returns to accumulating
capital are going to be lower. And so,
then these rich people are going to be
consuming more.
Right? So, because of it they were the
the incentive to invest is smaller. So,
basically you kind of think about this
in general equilibrium.
>> Yeah.
>> Um the general equilibrium of this sort
of process like we have gotten
tremendously more richer since you know,
1820. We've gotten many more people are
investing.
But, you're still getting a consumption
response which keeps, you know, people
employed and labor share high. And
that's because
>> Wait, it it it Well, hold on. Not
necessarily. I think you're probably
making the same point, but it I mean
they could just It could be that their
investment has to be titrated through
actual laborers who have to go like do
things for their investment to work
which like would not In the future, only
the consumption is human mediated.
Right? Cuz the investment can just be
done by the robots.
>> But, if the returns are if you So, we're
in the scenario with high with like how
you can keep high labor share, right?
Let's take that scenario. In the
scenario with high labor share for
whatever reason, the the returns to
capital are going to be lower.
>> Yeah, that's right. And then the I mean
the to the earlier thing messy middle
where you're saying why this is
implausible, I I feel like we can do a
similar thing here where for returns to
capital to be lower, the growth rate has
to have be
lower, right? I mean it certainly has to
be lower than what we're expecting
through the period of transformative AI.
You know, if there's explosive growth.
>> Yeah, yes and no. I mean so the the the
capital stock could grow quickly, but
the price of capital goods relative to
consumption goods could be falling
faster than the capital stock is
growing.
>> Oh, interesting.
>> Yep. It's the It's the difference
between like the the the the potential
frontier of technology and like the what
the realized prices of these things cuz
you have relative prices. That's what
really important here.
>> So, you're saying
I could be putting my money towards
you know, earning 30% interest and
investing in data centers. Uh or
whatever there'll be something in the
future if growth rate is high that earns
high returns. Um
or I could
as a result of all these technological
breakthroughs or some cool product
that I really want to buy right now and
both of those will be compelling
options.
>> Yeah, it doesn't have to be a new
product. It could be a human intrinsic
product.
>> Right. Although
if it's a human intrinsic product
we would want to have it much more in
the future than we want it now because
the
sort of the the thing it compares
against is
>> So, we might want it the same as we want
it now in the sense that like the
marginal utility in a valor in a
performance is exactly the same as now,
right? But the marginal utility in a
robot I just be a lot lower than now,
right?
>> Yeah.
>> So, so
>> in units of robots we want it a lot more
than we want it now, right?
>> Right.
>> So, would the interest rate be 30%? It
depends what you mean by the real
interest rate, okay? It might be that
every robot now can turn into, you know,
100 robots next year, right? So, in
units of robots the interest rate is
10,000%.
>> Right.
>> the price of robots is falling really
fast
>> Prices adjust. I mean, that's the whole
I think that's the whole point is that
>> Yeah, but though but here prices are
adjusting in this interesting way that
too many macro models don't allow for,
right?
>> So, that what what a
>> what's happening is what would be called
investment specific technical change
where yeah, the price of capital is like
falling relative to the price of
consumption instead of like the standard
doing the standard macro thing of saying
there's just output.
>> Yeah.
>> chimera of the thing called output which
is one-for-one can be allocated to
capital or consumption, right? That's
not going to be true in this world.
Every unit of capital next year is
giving up way less consumption than each
unit of capital
this year cuz like the just one robot
now turns into many robots next year but
but the number of valid reasons is the
same.
>> And again, we're going to go back to the
increasing varieties thing where like if
all of those extra robots next year
actually different varieties of robots
that I'm not getting satiated on those
robots then then it's a very different
different story.
>> Yeah, right.
And but now we're talking about the
consumption world whereas
for the investment side of things
there could be just some greedy titan of
industry who keeps wanting more and more
robots and that alone would be enough it
would to increase the marginal value of
robots and therefore decrease labor
share.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah, okay. But I would right right are
we not expecting greedy titans of
industry to keep existing?
>> I mean greedy titans of industry
historically have like built libraries
and
>> But that's because they die and they're
like
>> they all die. Everybody dies.
>> Well,
we'll see. [laughter]
>> But I mean like conditional on people
dying, I think like you know, his like
again, I you you had a guest on the show
who said like, you know, to understand
the future you should think about the
past and I think like I I you could have
new types of titans being Right. being
born who's where their entire reason for
accumulating wealth is just to
accumulate wealth. But a lot of the time
you know, at least historically, I'm
just talking about historically, the
wealth accumulation process is part of a
large social
sort of like social interaction amongst
peers, amongst the community where you
want to be admired in some way or
something like that. So the people end
up like the the stylized fact of titans
of his of industry is like you
accumulate the capital and then you like
buy a bunch of stuff.
>> Yeah, I mean
I I it is sort of a historical question
but it does seem to me in a lot of cases
what is happening
is that
as they near the end of their life, they
either hand it off to their children who
are worse stewards of capital than they
are, and they don't even manage to grow
their wealth at the rate the economy
grows, much less faster than the economy
grows, which their parents were doing.
And also they're like, well, I care less
about my children having it than me sort
of playing this game of accumulating
wealth, and so I'm just going to give it
to some trust. Um, and if people are
living longer, or if they can figure out
some way in which to align
their trust to this wealth accumulation
process. It just feels like the
evolution here is so strong where you
just need a couple of agents that think
this way for this to be the dominant
thing
determining the preferences of the whole
economy cuz this part is growing much
faster than the other parts of the
economy.
>> I think you just, like, the the part
about satiation and and diminishing
marginal utilities I I think it keeps
coming up, but I think it's really,
really important. Like, you know, if a
person has an intrinsic preference for
accumulation.
>> Right.
>> That's just like that's what they want.
I think your story is totally right. But
But that's just like not how usually
preferences work. Like you have enough,
whatever, you hedonics in your life, and
then then like the social status, all of
this sort, you know, Rousseau wrote
about this, St. Augustine wrote about
this. This is like a
kind of like a basic part of
preferences. Now,
two you you guys are arguing about
something else where like
you have you could have such high
concentration that you could just have a
couple of exceptions to the rule, and
that's going to be enough. And I I I
have nothing to say about that.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, I mean, I I think that the claim
is a little stronger, not just like you
could have some exceptions, but that it
seems that historically and today
we see the exceptions, and they just
haven't really taken over the economy
historically because they have they've
been these dissipation shocks, as
they're called. So, they've like given
it to their kids who squandered it, or
they put it in
foundations which um
uh which spent it. I mean, it's not a
really a shock, but I mean it's Right.
People went People might have liked to
uh
you know, fill the universe with
monuments to themselves and sort of
whatever
live forever is very wealthy. And it's
like a weird preference, but it's not a
hypothetical preference. I think that's
that's the thing.
>> Yeah.
>> But who knows what what's going on in
their heads.
I think um
uh even without those like the kind of
intrinsic preference for accumulation,
there are
some
instrumental reasons why people some
people might value accumulation, which
is also worth bringing up. So, um
there's
uh
desire for uh political or philosophical
or religious influence, right? So,
people get into sort of an arms race
over like what, you know, what society
you looks like and what people believe.
Um and then similarly, but differently
cuz it's not an arms race,
there's just uh total total utilitarian
philanthropy, right? So, uh when I think
about
why it might be good to have a lot of
wealth in the future as a good classical
utilitarian, to me the value is
or at least one way you could have a
kind of almost unsatiating uh
utility function in in having wealth in
the future is to create new happy
beings, right? They just add to the
total welfare of the world.
You know, I mean, this this idea goes at
least as far back as like Bostrom's
astronomical waste point that we could
like put Dyson spheres around the stars
and turn all the energy into really
happy simulations and whatnot.
>> I think the particular greediness of
this optimizer doesn't matter what
they're greedy for. I think
I I if you're getting about utilitarian
philosophy whatever,
um like it's just a pure von Neumann
probe
has I don't know what the is this an
accurate to say that they just have high
marginal value for like the random solar
system they'll occupy cuz that turns
into like more solar systems that turns
into more solar systems. But like a von
Neumann probe is a thing that will can
exist, right? And that's like a very
greedy optimizer.
>> Yeah, I mean if we're talking about like
whether they'll dominate the economy,
maybe this is a technicality, but um
you know, we we we only count
final consumption goods and investment
goods as GDP, right? If there's just
this phenomenon
>> How does a Von Neumann probe show up in
GDP?
>> Well, yeah, exactly, right? So, if if if
it's like if we recognize it as a person
that like owns itself and it's like sort
of, you know, optimizing on the margin
between like spending a bit more on a
baby Von Neumann probe that colonizes
another star system or like a ballerina
or something and it's just like it
doesn't value the ballerina very much,
but it's yeah.
>> Yeah, when we're talking about like AI
beings or like like it just it just
completely depends on how we're doing
the accounting there.
>> Right. Yeah, but it's just like what
does the world look like in a world
where like Von Neumann probes are
possible? Is it possible labor share is
high? But
anyways, yeah, I think it's possible the
labor share is high the way we usually
account it.
>> One of the biggest problems in RL right
now is credit assignment because you
have these extremely long rollouts and
you need to know why they succeeded or
failed. One of Cursor's researchers,
Sasha Rush, gave me a blackboard lecture
on how they use targeted RL with textual
feedback to deal with this problem and
train Composer 2.5. I filmed on my
iPhone, so apologies for the camera
work.
>> So, we generate this output. It's just a
sequence of tokens.
Um we're going to send those sequence of
tokens to this model that's going to
read it.
>> Yeah.
>> Um and then it's going to isolate a
specific say turn that it says is
problematic.
>> Yeah.
>> Then we're just going to do text
manipulation. We're just going to take
that trajectory and we're literally just
going to like
smash in some extra tokens.
>> After Cursor injects these hint tokens,
they run another forward pass. The
trajectory itself doesn't change, but
the hint causes the model to assign
lower probability to the error tokens.
Cursor then trains the original model to
match those probabilities, basically
teaching it to downweight these specific
mistakes. There's a lot more nuance that
we couldn't include in this video. If
you want to watch the full thing, I
posted it on my Twitter. And if you want
to try out Cursor
2.5, head to cursor.com/dwarkesh.
Do economists have any advice for
countries which are not in the AI
production chain? If you if you're not
either producing the AI models, you're
not producing
the hardware that goes into AI models,
if you're not Korea making HBM or Taiwan
making
with the fabs or not
uh the Netherlands with ASML.
Like what is India or Nigeria? What
should India be doing right now? If
you're talking to Modi right now, what
do you say?
>> I I I think the biggest lack of
resources that we have allocated in the
economic profession is thinking about
middle-income developing countries in
the in the age of AI.
And I mean this is this is my fault, you
know, this is something I fault myself
with as well. There's not enough people
thinking about this question. Like there
are scenarios where, you know, you get
like AI technology,
um you know, uh
at being allocated and dissipating to to
Nigeria and developing countries and
things like that. And like that leveling
the playing field. Like essentially like
giving them a like a level up as far as
far as capabilities. Um but there's
another world where like because they
don't have enough resources, they're not
making
uh they're not training the models, they
don't have the hardware where they just
completely get left behind. And because
of, you know, um automation, we can
produce commodities
in developed countries now. Right. Then
we don't even have, you know, the
consumer market. And then that that
world looks pretty pretty bad.
>> Yeah.
>> It seems to me like an extension of the
messy middle case, right? Um one of the
ways in which the messy middle might
only be bad in a narrow range of
scenarios isn't just that like it would
be easy to redistribute because the pie
would be bigger, but because um
the interest rate would be way higher
and or sort of equivalently the price of
everything except the
human intrinsic goods would be would be
falling really rapidly. It's sort of two
sides of the same point. Um
a little bit of savings would turn into
a lot of consumption next year, right?
So, things have to go really wrong for
us to like just get over the threshold
of,
uh, you know, capital being productive
enough to automate lots of work, but not
be productive enough that that the
interest rate is high and or the price
of capital produced goods is falling a
lot, okay? So, even without
redistribution, a little bit of savings
will save a lot of people.
>> And sorry, you're saying if the
developing countries have some savings
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah.
>> in the developed world, that will be
enough to produce a lot of surplus that
they can benefit
>> They will now be able to consume a lot
using their savings.
>> so, but but but I mean, uh, the messy
middle could be like wider in this case.
I mean, they're starting from such a
lower level in terms of like how much
they have saved but they haven't and how
how much it's like actually indexed to
the global economy. Yeah. Um, and I
think it's important for them to get on
it now and I don't have strong feelings
about whether it should take the form of
like sovereign wealth funds that invest
in
>> Right.
>> the the right supply chains or, uh,
or just, you know, subsidies to their
own citizens to buy a little bit of
them.
>> This is actually I think a crucial
point. We were talking earlier about why
the Rockefellers or whatever the world,
why their descendants don't control
everything, if our argument about the
selection of these kind of kind of
greedy optimizers hold. And one argument
is just that it's like very hard to
index the economy, and maybe they would
have just decided to have their heirs
index the economy and have it grow at
the rate of economic have their wealth
grow at the rate of economic growth and
they would be, you know, trillionaires
their heirs would be trillionaires by
now. But
it just histor- before index funds
existed, it's just very hard to just get
um,
get a represent- it's just a very small
fraction of the economy going back a
hundred years accounts for a majority of
the value created now, and if you miss
those particular things, you would have
basically,
uh, your wealth would have just kind of
stagnated. Um, and maybe there was a
brief golden window from the creation of
index funds up until,
I don't know, five years ago where
actually you could index the economy and
you could have your wealth grow at the
rate of the economy grows. But now that
we're in this world with very
concentrated returns, especially two
private companies, which is capital that
is, as we were making a point in our
blog post,
um the average person has
disproportionately less access to. Uh as
opposed to, you know,
most of the capital is like having a
random house, at least in the US.
>> Or a part of a house.
>> Yeah, which is as as as we were saying
is sort of unique
a capital that is uniquely ill-suited to
be complementary to the production of AI
or the serving of AI or to robots.
>> Um or the kinds of goods that the rich
will bid up the prices of.
>> Exactly, right? Cuz what is the value of
a house currently? It is really the land
is close to other humans and modular
relational stuff that is just not going
to be the main factor of production.
>> And this is the way Georgian tax would
would not raise enough money for for the
sort of programs that that that we were
discussing.
>> Right. Stepping back, the point I was
trying to make is if it gets harder to
index the economy now
and that is supposed to be the main way
in which both one, normal people are
supposed to
modular some sort of use universal basic
income.
>> the developed world.
>> In the developed world, are supposed to
have some leverage on or have some
purchase on the wealth from AI.
And it's also the way that developing
countries are supposed to have some
purchase on the wealth gains from AI.
But it's very hard I don't know is is
like a is Nigeria own a lot of SK Hynix
and like Anthropic? I'm guessing not,
right? It's not enough for them to just
own the S&P 500.
>> So actually this brings up a really
important point. Like is AI going to be
like electricity or social media?
>> Right.
>> If it's So think about ComEd or ComEd is
in whatever whatever the electricity
provider here is. It's a monopoly.
It provides a resource that everybody
uses, but do we think about electricity
is like generating creating
concentration of power and is ComEd like
having like this huge amount of
political power, social power, something
like that.
No, because a lot with electricity, a
lot of the downstream benefits actually
came to like the users of the
electricity rather than the rather than
the actual entity producing the
electricity. On the other hand, with
social media, it was the opposite case,
right? Social media, you know, it was
everywhere. Everybody uses social media,
but the rents went to the platform.
>> But that's a really interesting point.
The more you think I I'm I don't endorse
this take. I'm going to talk talk out
loud. The more you think AGI is going to
be
it
is
um our economy is going to be run on AGI
the way our economy currently runs on
electricity.
That it is this is a broad fundamental
transformation of the entire economy,
the more it looks like electricity, and
the more it's like every company in the
S&P of the future
>> Exactly.
>> if it's going to make it to the S&P 500,
it is because it has leveraged AI.
>> Exactly. And then you're indexed again.
>> Yeah, exactly.
But then again, I guess it is totally
if you just look at the how concentrated
the S&P is over time, you know, just
like these big tech companies much more
so
I I guess this is a good so fundamental
point that it's hard to reason about
about how much of the
gains from AI these individual private
companies will be able to control.
>> And I I I think like the open model
thing is going to be a big big
>> Right.
>> point here, right? So, like if if we're
indeed like we we're we're in a we're in
a world where it's like the open models
are models are 6 months behind the
frontier, 9 months, then, you know,
we'll hit AGI, we'll hit whatever, and
like in 6 months, like everybody has
access to this to this resource.
>> it this goes to show you that every
question is connected to every other
because then that question about whether
there's runaway gains connects to
questions about recursive
self-improvement, and even from
recursive self-improvement, then
continual learning, which or online
learning, which lets the model learn on
the job. So, if it's deployed, it gets
to learn more. And these are just sort
of like
technical question or forecasting
technical questions, which then impact,
I guess, whether your Ghana will have
any purchase on
>> Yeah.
>> the returns of AGI.
Um
But, it sounds like your answers are
really
The reason I'm emphasizing the question
is I think both for the messy middle and
for developing countries, a
recommendation that is often made
naively is you got to do some kind of
retraining, you got to do some kind of
like
jobs program, or you got to have them
build data centers in your country.
And I think you guys are suggesting
something closer to just
buy the index of AGI. That's like a
probably much more cleaner and much more
likely to succeed strategy.
>> It It's really good There These are the
two scenarios, right? So, I think there
is a world where it is concentrated, in
which case it's going to be really hard
to index AGI.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh There is another world where it is
not It's electricity, then like
basically every company has access to
AGI. So, you just buy you you just buy
the index. So, like, you know, Nigeria
just needs to buy the index. And they
And Nigeria has access to AGI.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. Like, because of the open minds.
>> So, just to um
get back to the question of like
about whether to go with retraining or
just trying to index.
I would prioritize trying to index, but
just given how fast AI could, you know,
hit the world. But,
um
I definitely wouldn't just rely on that
because like it could
the the sort of um
messy middle type cases or the just a
long timelines cases on which like you
we don't get it anything like AGI all
that soon. Um
Well, still you'll just be like leaving
a lot of value on the table if you could
have like retrained to be a bit better,
you know,
like educated to how you know how to use
the latest wave of computing and and
>> Yeah. So, I I don't I don't I don't I
don't think there's that much of a an
either or there. Like, I mean, maybe the
reason to be pessimistic about this is
because one of the reasons a country's
poor is that it has a bad education
system. And so, becoming the best in the
world at retraining people at using AI
It seem like a particularly promising
um particularly promising strategy for
this that for country.
>> Although there there are cases where
like in in develop developing countries
you you had this like leapfrogging
effect with like for example like mobile
banking or something like that. It's
more it's much more prevalent in like
Nigeria than it is in
in Germany or something like that. Like
there everybody's doing mobile banking.
They have they have it on their phones.
They're constantly
doing this sort of thing. So I mean
I I again I'm not putting probabilities
on this but like with a transformative
technology like AI you could get
leapfrogging.
>> Yeah.
>> Where you know you skip the step in the
middle and you can get like really
astronomical growth.
>> Maybe.
>> Just about the ease of indexing can I
just quickly say I
uh
I think it's definitely something to
worry about a bit and keep an eye on
but as discussed in in our own essay and
as other people have pointed out it's
already not that hard to index. So it's
not there's been a bit of an increase in
the privatization of returns but it's
still like you know well under 20% of
the total market cap of
um
non-non-tiny
companies in in the US is is a private
and
you know everyone thinks about open AI
and Anthropic and then if if that's
where all the wealth will will accrue
then yeah like all these questions about
whether open models will stay only a
little bit behind you know
uh those are important
um
but you know even they look like they're
going public before too long probably um
and the frictions that have been keeping
companies from going public might
themselves be alleviated by AI a lot
right just all of the disclosure
requirements and and whatnot. They want
to get access to more potential
investors too.
And uh
um
if I had to guess I would guess that the
kind of
long kind of general trend of just like
lowering those frictions and making it
easier for more and more people to index
more and more will continue despite the
recent bump in the other direction.
>> This actually makes me hope even more so
than before that the labs do get
commoditized.
Or at the very least they go public as
soon as possible. But hopefully they
just get totally commoditized because
um I think AI will be much more popular
and uh
more importantly will be much more
likely to lead to broad increases in
prosperity if the gains are
just not particularly It is as hard to
capture the gains of AI as it is to
capture the gains of electrification.
>> Yeah, exactly. So I think like everybody
There's no anti-electricity people out
there, right?
>> I mean electricity doesn't take your
job, but
>> Well,
>> it takes some people's jobs.
>> Yeah, yeah. And and I I I think it's um
I you know, this is maybe a tangential
to the conversation. I think like um
there's there's like a really ne-
narratives matter, and there's this like
really negative narrative around AI
right now, but that's because people are
not putting out the positive narrative.
Or because And And there's a reason.
It's It's It's more difficult to imagine
something that doesn't exist that's
about good thing than losing something
that exists.
>> Right, yeah.
>> Right. So it's very easy for somebody to
to to go on a podcast and to say like,
"These jobs that you like, they're going
away." than to somebody to spin up like
a an an a utopia which doesn't exist.
>> Right. I hope this isn't
too out of left field, but I think I
would be remiss if I didn't point out
one big cost of having commoditized
frontier AI models, which is the
uh
the tech race dynamic, right? That like
for safety purposes, you might want
fewer frontier
>> [clears throat]
>> companies so that each one has a buffer
in case they want to slow things down to
make things safer.
And uh the way this relates to our point
before about the kind of widespread
access, you know,
of of the returns.
Um
is that I think there's a lot less of a
trade-off there than some people
imagine. Where you know, some people
think either
uh frontier AI gets commoditized and we
all enjoy the benefits, but there might
be some risk because like it it's the
market's really competitive and
cutthroat, or um
things are safer because there's a big
gap between the leader and the laggard,
but that means that the leaders get
fantastically wealthy.
No, like you could just have a
relatively big gap, but it's a public
company ownership and it's widely
distributed.
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> More recently I have been thinking that
the uh risk of commodification, which is
that it sort of diffuses the the the
it diffuses the ability to use AI to
harmful ends is worth the uh benefit
that I I just feel I worry that not only
having these concentrated labs um makes
it so that the sort of surplus isn't as
widely distributed through society, but
also creates a very tangible, clear
political target for the government um
to I mean, we saw this with the Defense
Production Act, right, against
Anthropic. Um if there wasn't one lab
that is or a couple of labs that are
clearly ahead of others, this kind of
threat would be much harder to make.
Uh thank you guys for doing this.
>> Yeah, thank you.
>> Thank you. I I I I feel like there's a
lot of unresolved questions, but I it is
it is helpful to know what the relevant
at least like what is the first branch
along all these important dimensions.
>> Great. Thank you.
>> Okay. Well,
>> Thanks.